# The Button Thought Experiment

If you had a button, that when pressed, caused you to instantly and painlessly disappear. While also not affecting anyone or the universe around your now or in the future in any way. Would you press that?

Most people likely wouldn't. But out of the people that would press it, what kind of reasons could it be? One obvious reason would be if you were in great pain, either physically or mentally. Another reason could be due to impulsiveness. You miss your bus on the way to work for instance.

Now... This kind of scenario is of course not possible. No human can disappear without affecting the universe trajectory in any way. And even if it was possible, that in itself raises issues. How would that work? If you for instance was replaced by a robot indistinguishable from you, how could you not still have moral responsibility from what that does?

But if we disregard those aspects and simply say that it was possible. Can we imagine a person who would press it that isn't depressed, isn't acting on impulse and generally has a relatively comfortable life?

There are obviously people who do the equivalent of pressing the button even though they are aware of the consequences of their actions. Many of those people traumatize the people that have the bad luck of being involved directly in the very act and they often traumatize even more people long-term.

And there doesn't seem to be any way around that fact. You can choose to end your existence but other's will pay a price for that. Now that might be justifiable due to them being in such a great amount of pain.

I think that a good way to imagine this is to think of it being two axes. The first one is how much "pain" you are in and the second axis is how much you would prefer to consequence-free not exist at all. A person being tortured for instance would score very highly on the pain axis and also likely very high on the other axis. Our person would score everything from slightly prefer to not exist to really prefer it. And the pain level could in theory be everything from him being in no pain to him being in great pain.

So if we go back to our person who would prefer non-existence. Why is he here? What is the exact reason of why he is here. The reason is that no matter how you try to twist and turn things he cannot stop existing without out seriously hurting people around him. And it is not even a thing that necessarily gives him a meaning in the traditional sense of the word. It might give him meaning or it might not give him meaning. That doesn't particulary chance the situation he is in. He is because he has to.

Now, if we continue down this track and try to envision this person that stays for this reason but in a way does it involontarily, how do you imagine this person? Do you imagine him as miserable? Does he take care of himself? Does he cry more than most people? To answer this we can circle back to the actual reason he is here and that's because he cares about people. Given this would it make sense for him to exercise? You could perhaps make it easier to examine it if we turn things around. Imagine a person who has to stay because he cannot bring himself to hurt people by ending himself. Does it make sense to imagine this person to be in extremely bad physical health and letting himself go. That very behavior does seem to contradict the very reason he is here, right? So he would likely exercise. Not necessarily because he enjoys it, or want to get in shape but rather that he has a duty to exercise because of the same reason he exist.

And what about happiness and mental health being? We have a person who arguably doesn't see life as worth it from his perspective. If he could stop existing he would. So how do you imagine his mental health to be? Will he choose to stay inside the whole day without opening the drapes? Or will he choose to go out into the sun and enjoy an ice cream? At first glance this does feel dangerously close to depression? But it we circle back to the very principle that forces him to exist, what would be most reasonable for him to do? If he stay inside and doesn't take care about his mental health he will seriously risk becoming a burden to people who he care about. This mean that you can see that he is not only forced to exist but he also has a duty to try to strive for happiness and to be happy. But not necessarily because he want to but because he has to. Similar to how he has a duty to exercise.

Now let us change to another important subject... What would you imagine this person's personal views of having children to be? What if he really enjoy spending time with children and also would like to have children. Will he have one given his philosophical position? Arguably he very likely wouldn't. It would feel somewhat contradictionary of him to create another human being that in itself later will end up not wanting to exist. So it is feels reasonable to assume that this person wouldn't have children even if he wanted to. Most people do want to have children for a myriad of reasons. But out of the people who doesn't want to have children due to philosophical reasons, we have anti-natalists. In a way, the position on this individual feels very similar to a anit-natalistic position but how do you think his thoughts would be on another person having a child? Would he oppose that? An anti-natalist would generally oppose it but this individual chooses to not have a child because he himself would prefer non-existence to existing. So following that logic he shouldn't necessarily oppose this other person if that person prefers existence. How about adoption? Adoption feels very reasonable to do for him. He doesn't risk creating another person and he can continue to serve people around him.

Let is now try to speculate on how this person would answer classical existential questions. How would he reason if someone asked him what the meaning of life is? It feels reasonable to assume that he would say that there is no meaning in life for him but there might be for some. It does not matter if whether there is meaning or not. There might be a meaning for him or there might not be. But he has to exist nontheless. Becuase he has a duty and obligation to exist. And how would he try to explain happiness? This is also something that he wouldn't necessarily have a concrete answer to more than that happiness is whatever makes happy. But this would be from the lens of his philosophical framework. If he becomes a better person by watching bird due to it bring him contentment he shouldn't necessarily do it because he want to but rather because he has to. His perspective is very similar to an absurtist positon. You can say that his stone is existence. He does not want to role the stone but he has no choice in the matter. But does he imagine Sisyphys to be happy or not? How would he reason there? Arguably it wouldn't matter. Sisphys might be happy, or he might not be happy. He can be absolutely miserable but that fact does not change the situation he is in. He is and he will be. It is not even about him just as well can try to be happy, he might be unable to find meaning or contentment. It does not matter. He will continue to push the stone.